The Artificial Intelligence Insight forums, also known as the A.I. Insight forums, are a series of forums to build consensus on how the United States Congress should craft A.I. legislation. Organized by Senate Majority Leader Charles "Chuck" Schumer, the first of nine closed-door forums convened on September 13.

Background
Amid a surge in the popularity and advancement of artificial intelligence, senator Chuck Schumer launched an effort to establish a framework for the regulation of A.I. in April. By the end of June, a preliminary framework – dubbed the "SAFE Innovation Framework" – was established and presented to Congress.Schumer also announced a series of forums wherein tech leaders who were well-acquainted with A.I. would help to "educate" Congress on the risks and problems that A.I. poses. Many tech leaders including Sam Altman, Elon Musk, and Sundar Pichai were set to attend the meetings. Many U.S. lawmakers and senators such as Mike Rounds and Todd Young were also set to attend.

September 13 forum
The overarching consensus following the conclusion the September 13 forum was that there "should be" regulations regarding the use and advancement of A.I., but it should not be made "too fast". Many tech executives who attended the forum also warned senators of the risks and threats that A.I. could pose. Musk, who attended the forum, stated afterwards that there was "overwhelming consensus" on the regulation of A.I.

Attendees
This is a list of people who attended the September 13 forum.
Elon Musk (Tesla, SpaceX, X Corp.)
Sam Altman (OpenAI)
Bill Gates (ex–Microsoft)
Jensen Huang (Nvidia)
Alex Karp (Palantir)
Satya Nadella (Microsoft)
Arvind Krishna (IBM)
Sundar Pichai (Alphabet Inc., Google)
Eric Schmidt (ex–Google)
Mark Zuckerberg (Meta)
Charles Rivkin (Motion Picture Association)
Liz Shuler (AFL-CIO)
Meredith Stiehm (Writers Guild of America)
Randi Weingarten (American Federation of Teachers)
Maya Wiley (LCCHR)
More than 60 U.S. senators

Future
Over the course of fall 2023, there is slated to be a total of nine forums on the topic of A.I., with the first hosted on September 13.


== References ==