Artificial Intelligence is the intelligence of machines or software rather than humans or animals. Culture change is a term used in public policy that emphasizes the influence of cultural capital on individual and community behavior.  Artificial Intelligence has become a cultural change in today's world because of how its capacity and efficiency are improving and advancing everything we as humans do in our daily lives.

Industrial culture
Author Chaopu Meng believes that man-machine integrated technology will become more of a normality in future industrial endeavors and that with the popularity of 5G technology, Artificial Intelligence will develop more cultural formats. Hongguo Zhang, Member of the China Center for Industrial Security Research, at the University of Beijing Jiaotong University, says that manufacturing intelligence is altering the manufacturing process, which includes the traditional industrial chain and division systems. Within medicine, training for radiologists must consist of completing tasks that only a human can do and leaving the rest to Artificial Intelligence. Radiologists and pathologists should not fear AI, but rather accept the convenience of solving challenging tasks, and learn to captain the cognitive intelligence they are using.

Academic culture
Author Jiling Zhang says that, in the AI-based education system consisting of machine learning, biometric recognition, and virtual reality, students are welcomed to a more immersive learning environment which will ultimately promote a more beneficial learning process. Anthony Picciano from the Graduate Center, at the City University of New York, says that Artificial Intelligence creates "learning analytics" and rudimentary AI software to determine a student's progression very closely and that these adaptive learning systems are customized to the personal needs of each individual student.

Business culture
Author Krishnamacharyulu Maramganti stresses that in order to have a successful, or lasting business in today's world, it is mandatory to embrace the changes that come with Artificial Intelligence. Authors Kumar Manish Yadav and Nishtha Dwivedi elaborate on the idea of AI already existing in business through branches of the company, such as Management of Expenses, customer service, and even managing one's own career, and it will continue to grow. In corporate environments, AI has become a significant tool. AI helps businesses gain competitive advantages, which makes it more in demand. Executives will also have to determine just how they use this cognitive function, and what tasks will be needed from human interaction.

Ethical culture
Center on AI Technology for Mankind at NUS Business School and Gary Kasparov from the renew democracy Initiative say that many people in society and the business world say that AI has its own ethical compass, but that it is not a true statement. They believe that no AI is good or bad, but the human-created algorithms given to the Intelligence are what cause the effect on how the AI operates. Organizations around the world have to understand the harmful consequences of their Artificial Intelligence technologies. Intelligence in large organizations has the power to be extremely destructive, and society has to understand the ethical problems this could bring to the human race.


== References ==