Electra (Greek: Ηλέκτρα Ilektra) is a 1962 Greek film based on the play Electra, written by Euripides. It was directed by Michael Cacoyannis, as the first installment of his "Greek tragedy" trilogy, followed by The Trojan Women in 1971 and Iphigenia in 1977. It starred Irene Papas in the lead role as Elektra, and Giannis Fertis as Orestis.

Plot
King Agamemnon is murdered by his wife Clytemnestra and her lover and Agememnon's cousin and childhood playmate Aegisthus. Of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra's children, Orestes goes into exile and safety while Electra is confined to the palace for some years and then forced to marry a peasant to disgrace her and any children.
Some years later, Electra seeks revenge with the help of her brother Orestes and their cousin Pylades. Orestes and Pylades go to a festival to Bacchus hosted by Aegisthus and, when Aegisthus challenges Orestes to a mock knife fight, Orestes uses the opportunity to kill him. Electra invites Clytemnestra to her house on a pretext where, despite Clytemnestra explaining to Electra her reasons for killing her husband and apologising for her actions towards Electra, Electra enables Orestes to stab Clytemnestra to death. At the end, the siblings feel remorseful and realise that they will be social outcasts for their action. They depart in different directions.

Cast
Irene Papas as Elektra
Giannis Fertis as Orestes
Aleka Katselli as Klytaemnistra
Manos Katrakis as the tutor
Notis Peryalis as Elektra's husband
Fivos Razi as Aegisthus
Takis Emmanuel as Pylades
Theano Ioannidou as chorus leader
Theodoros Dimitriou (Theodore Demetriou) as Agamemnon
Elsie Pittas as young Elektra
Petros Ampelas as young Orestes

Awards
The film was entered into the 1962 Cannes Film Festival where it won the award of Best Cinematic Transposition. The film was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. The film also won three awards in Thessaloniki Film Festival, for best film and best director (Michalis Cacoyannis) and best actress (Irene Papas).

DVD
Electra was released on DVD by MGM Home Entertainment on March 5, 2002 as a Region 1 DVD.

See also
List of historical drama films
Greek mythology in popular culture
List of submissions to the 35th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
List of Greek submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film

References
External links
Electra at IMDb
Electra at AllMovie
Electra at the TCM Movie Database