Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI) is located at Izatnagar, Bareilly in Uttar Pradesh state.  It is an advanced research facility in the field of veterinary medicine and allied branches.  It has regional campuses at Mukteshwar, Bangalore, Palampur, Pune, Kolkata and Srinagar.

History
Formerly known as Imperial Bacteriological Laboratory, it was renamed in 1925 as Imperial Veterinary Research Institute. The name of the institute was changed following independence to Indian Veterinary Research Institute.  Administrative control of the institute is currently under Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), New Delhi. The Ministry of Education, Govt. of India on the recommendation of University Grants Commission conferred the status of the Deemed to be University on 16 November 1983 under Section 3 of UGC Act 1956. It has recently started its UG education in 2015-16 with 20 seats. The number of seats in undergraduate is 55 in the year 2023-24, Which include 45 regular seats, 7 payment seats and 3 seats for NRI students.

Academics
UG Programme at IVRI Deemed University

With the vast experience of the Indian Veterinary Research Institute Deemed University in imparting quality education at Masters and Doctoral levels, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and Veterinary Council of India had given the responsibility to start undergraduate courses of Veterinary Sciences i.e. BVSc AH. Accordingly, from the academic session 2015-16, the institute has initiated under-graduate programme in Veterinary Sciences leading to BVSc AH degree. Two batches of the BVSc AH students have successfully completed their bachelor's degree.
NUMBER of SEATS :
Presently, total seat position for BVSc AH Programme is 50 seats. The details of the seat position are as under: -
Total Number of Seats = 50

Number of Seats to be filled by VCI = 15%
Number of Seats to be filled by ICAR-IVRI Deemed University = 85%
Regular/ Open Seats = 62.5%
Payment Seats = 15%
NRI seats = 7.5%
Note : The reservation policy of Government of India shall apply for filling-up these seats.
DURATION OF COURSE
The duration of B.V.Sc. & A.H degree course is spread over five and half complete professional years including a compulsory rotating internship of one year duration.
ADMISSION PROCEDURE
Admission of students to BVSc & AH degree programme is made only on the basis of his or her merit obtained in NEET (UG) Examination for the year in which admissions are made, subject to fulfillment of the other criteria as laid down by Veterinary Council of India Minimum Standards of Veterinary Education (MSVE) Regulations, 2016.
IVRI BVSc AH Admission Application Portal on the IVRI Website. The detailed procedure for Counseling and Admission Procedure is made available on the website when the applications are invited for admissions.
ESSENTIAL QUALIFICATIONS:
Candidates should be Indian Nationals. A candidate must have attained minimum age of 17 years on or before the 31st December of the year for which admissions are taken. The candidate must have qualified NEET(UG) Examination for the year in which admissions are made.
He or She has passed the qualifying examination as defined under VCI - MSVE Regulations, 2016 with the subjects of Physics, Chemistry, Biology or Biotechnology and English (as a core course) and obtained marks as specified under regulations (7) or an examination equivalent to intermediate science examination of an Indian University or Board recognized by the Association of Indian Universities taking Physics, Chemistry and Biology/Biotechnology including a practical test in each of these subjects and English.
As per MSVE Regulations, 2016, a candidate under General Category for admission to the BVSc & AH degree course shall have to qualify in each of the subjects of English, Physics, Chemistry, Biology or Biotechnology, and obtained 50% marks in aggregate of these subjects, at the qualifying examination. In respect of candidates belonging to the SC or ST or other special category of students as specified by the Government from time to time, marks required for admission shall be 47.5%.Candidates securing equal to or more than the NEET (UG) cut-off marks as per category, will only be considered for admission against Regular/Open or Payment Seats. The candidates seeking admission on the basis of NRI status are required to produce duly attested and verified photocopies of NRI/citizenship certificate, eligibility document and passport or any other valid document. The admission will be made on merit of 10+2 examination or equivalent without requirement of appearing in the NEET (UG) examination. A candidate shall not be allowed admission to BVSc & AH degree course if he or she suffers the following disabilities, namely:-
(a)Disability of total body (including chest or spine) more than 50%
(b)Disability of lower limb of more than 50%
(c)Disability of upper limb
(d) Visually handicapped candidates and those with hearing disability
(e) Candidates with progressive diseases like myopathies etc.
(f) Disabilities which otherwise would interfere in the performance of the duties of a veterinarian.
HOSTEL ACCOMMODATION:
Limited hostel accommodation is available at the institute. The students will be provided Hostel either in double/ triple occupancy depending on the availability. All the hostels are provided with internet/ Wi-Fi facilities.
SYSTEM OF EDUCATION:
A professional year of the undergraduate programme (BVSc & AH) covers at least two hundred ten days of instructions excluding time spent for annual examinations and the total course duration is 5 years and 6 months (1st, 2nd and 3rd professional years of 01 year duration each; 4th professional year of one year and six months duration and a compulsory internship programme of one year).Medium of instruction to B.V Sc.& A.H. degree course shall be English. Every student shall attend a minimum of 75% of the total number of lecture and laboratory courses (practical) separately in each course. Students falling short of the prescribed minimum attendance in a particular course shall not be permitted to take in the examination for that course. A student shall be promoted to next higher professional class only if he or she has passed in all the subjects of his or her class by obtaining at least 50% marks in theory (internal and external combined) and practical separatelyA student may also be allowed provisional promotion to next higher class till the declaration of the result of the compartment examination, provided the provisional promotion shall be subject to clearance in the compartment examination of that or those subject(s) and shall be provisional and if the student fails in the compartment examination, he or she shall stand automatically reverted to the class from where he or she was allowed provisional promotion Failed students shall register again for the entire professional class they failed and such students shall have to fulfill all requirements of the class afresh. A student failing in the annual examination for three consecutive years in a professional year of Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry degree programme shall be finally dropped automatically from the University on account of poor academic performance (except fourth professional year).In no case, a student shall be allowed to continue his/her BVSc& AH studies beyond 9 academic years (including internship).The 10.00 points scale for grading is followed. The corresponding ranking of OGPA with respect to traditional scoring system of Division Ranking shall be as follows: 8.000 and above- First Division with Distinction 7.000-7.999- First Division 6.000- 6.999- Second Division 5.000- 5.999-PassA student should secure overall grade point average (OGPA) of 5.00 out of 10.00 at the end of degree programme to be eligible to get B.V.Sc. & AH. Degree.
PROFESSIONAL YEAR-WISE DISTRIBUTION OFCOURSES
FIRST PROFESSIONAL
Veterinary Anatomy4+3=7
Veterinary Physiology4+1=5
Livestock Production Management; 4+2=6
Total Credits 12+6=18
SECOND PROFESSIONAL
Veterinary Microbiology 3+2=5
Animal Genetics and Breeding 3+1=4
Animal Nutrition3+1=4
Veterinary Biochemistry2+1=3
Total Credits 15+7=22
THIRD PROFESSIONAL
Veterinary Pharmacology and Toxicology4+1=5
Veterinary Public Health and Epidemiology3+1=4
Veterinary Parasitology 3+2=5
Livestock Products Technologyp;sp; 2+1=3
Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Extension 3+1=4
Education
Veterinary Clinical Practices-I0+1=1
Livestock Farm Practices 0+2=2
Total Credits 15+9=24
FOURTH PROFESSIONAL
Veterinary Surgery and Radiology2+1=3
Veterinary Medicine 4+1=5
Veterinary Gynaecology and Obstetrics 2+1=3
Veterinary Clinical Practices-IIsp; 0+6=6
Total Credits 8+9=17
In addition to the Core Courses above, a student shall have to successfully complete the Internship (of one year duration) including Entrepreneurial Training for the award of Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry degree.Remount Veterinary Squadron or National Cadet Corp or Equestrian or National Social Service or Sports and games shall be non- credit (0+1) training programmes any of which for all the Professional Years shall be compulsory (except fourth) for the award of Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry degree and the performance of the students in these training programmes shall be assessed and graded as Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory and student has to obtain Satisfactory grading for successful completion of course requirements.
Master Programme at IVRI Deemed University
Admission for MVSc programme is being done on the basis of All India Entrance Examination (PG) conducted by the Education Division, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, through National Testing Agency, New Delhi. All the candidates including sponsored (in-service) for seeking admission to MVSc programme must have to appear in the written Examination. For more information related to Competitive Examination, please visit the Education Division, ICAR, New Delhi website.(www.icar.org.in.) All the seats for Master’s programme are to be filled on the basis of combined examination for admissions and award of ICAR PG scholarship conducted by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. The candidates for admission to Master’s programme must have Bachelor's degree in Veterinary Science in the concerned discipline as per the Veterinary Council of India. On the basis of merit and after online counseling, ICAR finalizes the students for Post-Graduate degree programme (MVSc) at ICAR-IVRI Deemed University in 19 disciplines as detailed below:
1.Veterinary Biochemistry
2.Veterinary Biotechnology
3.Animal Genetics and Breeding
4.Animal Nutrition
5.Bio-Statistics
6.Livestock Economics & Statistics
7.Livestock Production and Management
8.Livestock Products Technology
9.Poultry Science
10.Veterinary Microbiology
11.Veterinary Extension Education
12.Animal Reproduction, Gynaecology and Obstetrics
13.Veterinary Medicine
14.Veterinary Parasitology
15.Veterinary Pathology
16.Veterinary Pharmacology & Toxicology
17.Veterinary Physiology
18.Veterinary Public Health & Epidemiology
19.Veterinary Surgery & Radiology
Approved student intake is 153 seats.
Doctoral Programme at IVRI
Admission for PhD programme will be held on the basis of all India Competitive Examination conducted by the Education Division, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, through National Testing Agency, New Delhi. All the candidates including sponsored (in-service) for seeking admission to PhD programme must have to appear in the written Examination. For more information related to Competitive Examination, please visit the Education Division, ICAR, New Delhi website.(www.icar.org.in.) All the seats for Doctoral Programme are to be filled on the basis of combined examination for admissions and award of ICAR JRF/SRF (PhD) conducted by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi. On the basis of merit and after counseling, ICAR finalizes the students for Doctoral Programme (PhD) at ICAR-IVRI Deemed University in 17 disciplines as detailed below: -
1.Veterinary Biochemistry Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline.
2.Veterinary Biotechnology
Eligibility = BVSc & AH with Master's degree in Biotechnology/ Animal Biotechnology/Animal Biochemistry/ Microbiology/ Immunology/ Virology
3.Animal Genetics and Breeding
Eligibility = BVSc & AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
4.Animal Nutrition
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline.
5.Livestock Production and Management
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline.
6.Livestock Products Technology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline.
7.Poultry Science
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline.
8.Veterinary Microbiology
Eligibility = BVSc & AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline of Veterinary Microbiology/ Veterinary Bacteriology/ Veterinary Virology/ Veterinary Immunology
9.Veterinary Extension Education
Eligibility = BVSc & AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline/ Vet. Medicine/ Vet. Gynaecology & Obstetrics/ Vet. Surgery/ Animal Nutrition
10.Animal Reproduction Gynaecology and Obstetrics
Eligibility = B.V.Sc. & AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
11.Veterinary Medicine
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
12.Veterinary Parasitology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
13.Veterinary Pathology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline / Avian Disease
14.Veterinary Pharmacology & Toxicology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
15.Veterinary Physiology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
16.Veterinary Public Health & Epidemiology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc. .& AH with Master's degree in Veterinary Public Health & Epidemiology/ Veterinary Public Health/ Veterinary Epidemiology/ Epidemiology / Public Health/ Pathobiology
17.Veterinary Surgery & Radiology
Eligibility = B.V.Sc.& AH with Master's degree in concerned discipline
Approved student intake
Total 110 seats

Rankings
IVRI, Bareilly has been ranked as number 6 in Agricultural and allied University category in India by the National Institutional Ranking Framework university ranking 2023.

Notable alumni
Kanneboyina Nagaraju, Professor; Founding Chair, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Binghamton University

See also
Veterinary Council of India
Indian Council of Agricultural Research

References
External links
Official website