This is a list of human anatomy mnemonics, categorized and alphabetized. For mnemonics in other medical specialties, see this list of medical mnemonics. Mnemonics serve as a systematic method for remembrance (not "rembrance") of functionally or sytemically related items within regions of larger fields of study, such as those found in the study of specific areas of human anatomy, such as the bones in the hand, the inner ear, or the foot, or the elements comprising the human biliary system or arterial system.

Bones
Bones of the Upper Limbs
How Rare U Cook Mesquite Pork?
Hurry! Ralph Untie Carol's Mini Pechay
He Races Until Chunky Men Pace

Humerus
Radius
Ulna
Carpal bones
Metacarpal bones
Phalanges(In order from proximal to distal)

Bones of the Arm
"Ultra Red Hair"
"Ultimate Rave Headquarters
Usually Really Hard
Unemployment Rises High

Ulna
Radius
Humerus

Ulna
Understand
Listen
Name
A bone

Bones of the Hand
"Please Make Cookies"
"Please Massage Chest"
People Make Choices 

Phalanges
Metacarpal bones
Carpal bones(These are in order from the distal end of the fingertips to the wrist)

Carpal bones
Carpal Bones:Sally Left The Party To Take Cathy Home:
She Looks Too Pretty Try To Catch Her:
Some Lovers Try Positions That They Can't Handle:Scaphoid, Lunate, Triquetrum, Pisiform, Trapezium, Trapezoid, Capitate, Hamate.

Carpal bones:So Long To Pinky, Here Comes The Thumb:Scaphoid, Lunate, Triquetrum, Pisiform, Hamate, Capitate, Trapezoid, Trapezium.

Carpal Bones:""" T T Table Par Chillate hui Sunny Leone """, , APG-007

Bones of the Phalanges
Damn My Pinky!
Dick Move Pal!
Distance My People
Don't Make Problems 

Distal phalanx
Middle phalanx
Proximal phalanx(From distal to proximal.)

Bones of the head
Cranial Bones
F POETS "Fluffy Puppies On Every Third Street"
Fit People Occasionally Eat Table Salt
Fat People Only Eat Thick Steak
Funny People Over Entertainment Try Songs

Frontal
Parietal
Occipital
Ethmoid
Temporal
SphenoidFraternity Parties Occasionally Teach Spam Etiquette

Frontal
Parietal
Occipital
Temporal
Sphenoid
EthmoidOld People From Texas Eat Spiders

Occipital
Parietal
Frontal
Temporal
Ethmoid
Sphenoid

Vomer
Very bad
Odor
Makes my
Eyes
Run

Bones of the Pectoral Girdle and Arm
CS
Clearwater Sucks
Crazy Seals 

Clavicle
Scapula

Spine (Vertebral Column)
Can This Little Servant Cook ?

Cervical vertebrae (Atlas (anatomy) = C1, Axis (anatomy) = C2)
Thoracic vertebrae
Lumbar vertebrae
Sacral vertebrae
Coccygeal vertebrae(These are in order superior to inferior- or starting from the top of the spine to the bottom.)

"Can Tall Ladies Sit Comfortably"
"Can The Ladies Stand Comfortably"
"Candy Takes Liking Stripping Catiously"
Can Tinkerbell Let Stars Collide

Breakfast at 7:00 - 7 cervical vertebrae
Lunch at 12:00 - 12 thoracic vertebrae
Dinner at 5:00 - 5 lumbar vertebrae

Projections of Bone
PTTTCC
"People Take Teaspoons Temporarily Causing Constipation

Process
Tubercle
Tuberosity
Trochanter
Condyle
Crest

Humerus tubercles (Bone projections)
Humerus tubercles
Girls In Leadership

Greater tubercle
Intertubercular groove
Lesser tubercle

Bone Markings of Humerus
Let's Rewatch Criminal Minds
Let's Roll Clay Moons

L-lateral epicondyle
R-radial fossa
C-coronoid fossa
M-medial epicondyle

Holes and Depressions in Bones
FFNF
"Fireman Fight Notorious Fires
Flowers Flow Neatly Fabulously
Family Feuds are No Fun 

Foramen
Fissure
Notch
Fossa

Muscles
Rotator Cuff Muscles
SITS
"Sit In The Seat" / The humerus SITS in the glenoid fossa
Shit I Trusted Sam
Swimming In The Summer
She Is The Scientist

Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Teres Minor
SubscapularisScooby Investigated The Mysterious Scene

Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Teres Minor
Subscapularis

Flexor muscles of the arm
3 Bs bend the elbow: (in order of location)

 Biceps brachii 
 Brachialis
 Brachioradialis

Anterior Flexor Muscles of the Forearm
Cats Run Circles Under Dogs Stomachs
Can't Really Come Until Day Six

Carpi
Radialis
Carpi
Ulnaris
Digitorum
Superficialis

Anterior leg Compartment (muscles)
"The Hospitals Are Not Dirty Places"

Tibialis anterior
extensor Hallucis longus
anterior tibial Artery
deep fibular Nerve
extensor Digitorum longus
Peroneus tertius [aka fibularis tertius]"Those Horses Are Never Doing Pilates"

Tibialis anterior
extensor Hallucis longus
anterior tibial Artery
deep fibular Nerve
extensor Digitorum longus
Peroneus tertius [aka fibularis tertius]"Tom Had A Night Down Town"

Tibialis anterior
extensor Hallucis longus
anterior tibial Artery
deep fibular Nerve
extensor Digitorum longus
Tertius for fibularis tertius

Posterior Leg Compartment (Posterior Ankle Structures)
Tom Dig A Nice Hole

Tibialis posterior
Flexor Digitorum longus
Artery - Posterior tibial artery
Nerve - Tibial nerve
Flexor Hallucis longusTom, Dick, And Very Naughty Harry

Tibialis posterior
Flexor Digitorum longus
Posterior tibial Artery
Posterior tibial Vein
Tibial Nerve
Flexor Hallucis longus

Joint, suture, ligament, tendon
Joint In The Wrist
RIC
"Rice Is Curing

Radiocarpal
Intercarpal
CarpometacarpalRIC
"Really Interesting Crap

Radiocarpal
Intercarpal
CarpometacarpalRoads In California

Radiocarpal
Intercarpal
CarpometacarpalRum In Coke

Radiocarpal
Intercarpal
Carpometacarpal

Joints/Sutures of Skull
CLSS
"Crazy Llamas Sassing Santa

Coronal suture
Lambdoid suture
Squamosal suture
Sagittal sutureThe Lazy Cat Sleeps Safely

Temporomandibular joint
Lambdoid suture
Coronal suture
Squamous suture
Sagittal suture"Come Sing Love Songs"

Coronal Suture
Sagittal Suture
Lambdoid Suture
Squamous Suture"Come Smoke L 's Sam

Coronal Suture
Sagittal Suture
Lambdoid Suture
Squamous Suture"Can Seagulls Lift Snacks

Coronal Suture
Sagittal Suture
Lambdoid Suture
Squamous Suture

Pes anserinus
A mnemonic to remember the muscles that contribute tendons to the pes anserinus and the innervations of these muscles is SGT FOT (sergeant FOT)

S- Sartorius
G- Gracilis
T- semiTendinosus  (from anterior to posterior).
F- femoral nerve
O- obturator nerve
T- tibial division of the sciatic nerve.Notice the order of the muscles (S, G, T) follows the order of the innervating nerves which correspond to those muscles (F, O, T)Another anterior to posterior is “Say Grace before Tea” Sartorius, Gracilis, semiTendinosus.

Vessels
Celiac trunk(Coeliac trunk): branches
Left Hand Side (LHS):

Left gastric artery
Hepatic artery
Splenic artery

Tributaries of the Inferior vena cava
"I Like To Rise So High"

Iliac vein (common)
Lumbar vein
Testicular (gonadal) vein (direct tributary on right side; empties into left renal vein -> IVC on left side)
Renal vein
Suprarenal vein (same drainage as gonadal vein)
Hepatic vein

Subclavian artery
The branches of the subclavian artery can be remembered using VITamin C and D.

Vertebral Artery
Internal Thoracic Artery
Thyrocervical Trunk
Costocervical Artery
Dorsal Scapular Artery

Internal iliac artery: branches
I Like Going Places Using My Very Own Unmanned Vehicle

Posterior division:

Iliolumbar artery
Lateral sacral artery
Superior gluteal arteryAnterior division:

Inferior gluteal artery
Internal pudendal artery
Umbilical artery
Middle rectal artery
Superior and inferior vesical artery
Obturator artery
Uterine artery (female)
Vaginal artery (female)

Contents of canal & foramen
Mediastinum
Superior mediastinum
The contents of superior mediastinum can be remembered using the mnemonic,  "TT ET AV N LO"
or
"Try To Eat Toast And Vitamins Now Little Oliver"
Thymus
Trachea
Esophagus
Thoracic duct
Aortic arch
Veins (Superior vena cava, brachiocephalic vein, left superior intercostal vein)
Nerves (Vagus nerve, phrenic nerve, left recurrent laryngeal nerve)
Lymphatics
Other small arteries and veins

Inferior mediastinum
Anterior inferior mediastinum
The contents of anterior inferior mediastinum can be remembered using the mnemonic,  "RT LN"
or
"ReTweet Light Novels!"
Remnants of the Thymus (inferior portion of thymus)
Lymph Nodes

Middle inferior mediastinum
The contents of middle inferior mediastinum can be remembered using the mnemonic,  "PHP P ASP" or "PHP plus ASP"
or
"'Personal Home Page' plus 'Active Server Pages'"
Phrenic nerve
Heart
Pericardium
Pericardiacophrenic artery
Ascending aorta
Superior vena cava
Pulmonary trunk

Posterior inferior mediastinum
The contents of posterior inferior mediastinum can be remembered using the mnemonic,  "DATE VSL"
or
"on the DATE Vivian Slapped Larry"
Descending thoracic aorta
Azygos veins (hemiazygos veins, accessory hemiazygos veins)
Thoracic duct (Cisterna chyli)
Esophagus (Esophageal plexus)
Vagus nerve
Splanchnic nerve (greater splanchnic nerve, lesser splanchnic nerve, least splanchnic nerve)
Lymphatics
The contents of posterior mediastinum can be remembered using the mnemonic,  "DATES"

Descending aorta
Azygous vein and hemiazygos vein
Thoracic duct
Esophagus
Sympathetic trunk/ganglia.

Foramen magnum
Contents of the foramen magnum: VAMPS-AT-SD
or
VAMPires Sing AT SD card
Vertebral arteries
Anterior spinal artery
Meninges associated with the spinal cord
Posterior spinal arteries
Spinal roots of the accessory nerve (CN XI)
Apical ligament of the dens
Tectorial membrane
Spinal cord
Dural veins (Dural venous sinuses)
Contents of the foramen magnum: VAMPS-ATM
or
VAMPires Sing AT Midnight

Vertebral arteries
Anterior spinal artery
Meningeal branches of the cervical nerves
Posterior spinal arteries
Spinal part of the accessory nerve
Alar and apical ligaments of the dens
Tectorial membrane
Medulla oblongata

Greater sciatic foramen
Structures passing through greater sciatic foramen below piriformis (S.N.I.P. N.I.P.)

sciatic nerve
nerve to obturator internus
internal pudendal vessel
pudendal nerve
nerve to quadratus femoris
inferior gluteal vessels
posterior cutaneous nerve of thigh

Lesser sciatic foramen
Structures passing through lesser sciatic foramen: (P.I.N.T.) 

pudendal nerve
internal pudendal vessels
nerve to obturator internus
tendon of obturator internus

Tarsal tunnel
a mnemonic to remember the contents of the Tarsal tunnel from anterior to posterior is "Tom, Dick and Harry". or alternatively "Tom, Dick (and very nervous) Harry" if the artery, vein, and nerve are included.

Femoral triangle
The femoral triangle is shaped like the sail of a sailing ship and hence its boundaries can be remembered using the mnemonic, "SAIL":

Sartorius
Adductor longus
Inguinal Ligament.The order of structures in the femoral triangle is important in the embalming of bodies, as the femoral artery is often exposed and used to pump embalming fluids into the body. The order of this neurovascular bundle can be remembered using the mnemonic, "NAVY":

Nerve
Artery
Vein
Y -fronts (the British term of a style of men's underwear with a "Y" shaped front that acts as a fly). The "Y" is midline (corresponding with the penis) and the mnemonic always reads from lateral to medial (in other words, the Femoral Nerve is always lateral).An alternate to this mnemonic is "NAVEL" for Nerve, Artery, Vein, Empty Space and Lymph, to include the deep inguinal lymph nodes located medial to the Femoral vein.

Popliteal fossa
A useful mnemonic to remember popliteal fossa anatomy (medial-to-lateral arrangement) is: Serve And Volley Next Ball. 

S: semimembranosus and semitendinosus (superior medial border)
A: artery (popliteal artery)
V: vein (popliteal vein)
N: nerve (tibial nerve)
B: biceps femoris  (superior lateral border).  The lateral and medial heads of gastrocnemius form the inferior border.

Carotid sheath contents
I See 10 CC's in the IV:p. 1
I See (I.C.) = Internal Carotid artery
10 = CN 10 (Vagus nerve)
CC = Common Carotid artery
IV = Internal Jugular Vein

Cavernous sinus contents
O TOM CAT:p. 1O TOM are lateral wall components, in order from superior to inferior.
CA are the components within the sinus, from medial to lateral. CA ends at the level of T from O TOM.

Occulomotor nerve (III)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Ophthalmic nerve (V1)
Maxillary nerve (V2)
Carotid artery
Abducent nerve (VI)
T: When written, connects to the T of OTOM

Vertebral level
Diaphragm apertures: spinal levels
Many mnemonics are used for diaphragm apertures including:

(V)oice (O)f (A)merica
number of letters = vertebral level

V - vena cava - T8
O - oesophagus - T10
A - aortic hiatus - T12
Vena cava = 8 letters = T8p. 1
Oesophagus = 10 letters = T10
Aortic hiatus = 12 letters = T12

Openings of the diaphragm and structures passing through
"I Read, Very Old, And Torn Articles." - (IVC, Right phrenic nerve), (Vagus nerve, Oesophagus), (Aorta, Thoracic duct, Azygos vein).

Openings of the diaphragm and structures passing through
Caval opening (vena caval foramen) (2: IR): Inferior vena cava, (branches of the) Right phrenic nerve
Esophageal hiatus (2: VO): (anterior and posterior) Vagal trunks, Oesophagus
Aortic hiatus (3: ATA): (descending) Aorta, Thoracic duct, Azygos vein

I ate 10 eggs at 12
I = IVC
ate = T8
10 = T10
Eggs = Esophagus
At = Aorta
12 = T12

Sternal angle
The sternal angle marks the approximate level of the 2nd pair of costal cartilages, which attach to the second ribs, and the level of the intervertebral disc between T4 and T5. In clinical applications, the sternal angle can be palpated at the T4 vertebral level.
The sternal angle is used in the definition of the thoracic plane. This marks the level of a number of other anatomical structures.

For structures lying at the level of the sternal angle, the following mnemonic can be used:

RAT PLLANT
Rib 2
Aortic arch
Tracheal bifurcation
Pulmonary trunk
Ligamentum arteriosum
Left recurrent laryngeal
Azygos Vein
Nerves (Cardiac and Pulmonary plexuses)
Thoracic duct

PLOT of EARTH PLLANTS
is a more detailed mnemonic including:

Phrenic and Vagus Nerve
Lymph Nodes
Oblique fissure of lungs (top of it)
Thymus
Esophagus (trending right to left)
Aortic Arch (bottom of the arch)
Rib 2, Manubrium-sternal angle, T4(more specifically T4-5 disc)
Tracheal Bifurcation (Carina: Latin –like keel of boat)
Heart
Pulmonary trunk bifurcation
L2 : Left Recurrent Laryngeal (Looping under Aorta); Ligamentum Arteriosum:  Connects Aortic Arch to Pulmonary. Bifurcation
Azygous vein arches over the root of the Rt. Lung and opens in SVC.
Nerve plexi:  Cardiac and Pulmonary Plexus
Thoracic duct (on its way to drain into the Left Subclavian)
SVC going down

Neuroanatomy
Afferent vs efferent
Afferent connection arrives and an efferent connection exits.

Brachial plexus
Remember To Drink Cold Beer - Roots, Trunks, Divisions, Cords, Branches

5 main nerves of brachial plexus.
"My Aunty Rocks My Uncle" - Musculocutaneous, Axillary, Radial, Median, Ulnar. (in order laterally to medially)
"My Uncle Rocks My Aunt" - Musculocutaneous (L), Ulnar (M), Radial (P), Median (LM), Axillary (P). (L: lateral cord, M: medial cord, P: posterior cord. LM: both lateral and medial cords. Memorize "LMP LMP".)
Lateral cord branches
LLM "Lucy Loves Me" - Lateral pectoral, Lateral root of the median nerve, Musculocutaneous.
Love Me Lucy (LML) - Lateral pectoral nerve, Musculocutaneous nerve, Lateral root of Median nerve.
Look My Lancer - Lateral pectoral nerve, Musculocutaneous nerve, Lateral root of Median nerve.
Medial cord branches
MMMUM "Most Medical Men Use Morphine" - Medial pectoral, Medial cutaneous nerve of arm, Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm, Ulnar, Medial root of the Median nerve.
"Money Makes Many Men Unhappy" - Medial pectoral nerve, Medial cutaneous nerve of arm, Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm, Medial root of median nerve, Ulnar nerve.
"M4U" - Medial pectoral nerve, Medial cutaneous nerve of arm, Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm, Medial root of median nerve, Ulnar nerve.
Union of 4 Medials - Ulnar nerve, Medial cutaneous nerve of arm, Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm, Medial pectoral nerve, Medial root of Median nerve.
Posterior cord branches
STAR - Subscapular (upper and lower), Thoracodorsal, Axillary, Radial.
RATS- Radial nerve, Axillary nerve, Thoracodorsal nerve, Subscapular (Upper & Lower) nerve.
ULTRA - Upper subscapular, Lower subscapular, Thoracodorsal, Radial, Axillary.
ULNAR- Upper subscapular nerve, Lower subscapular nerve, Nerve to latissimus dorsi, Axillary nerve, Radial nerve.

Cerebellum
Deep cerebellar nuclei and their positions relative to the midline: "Fat Guys Eat Donuts," where each letter indicates the medial to lateral location in the cerebellar white matter.
Or inversely, "Don't Eat Greasy Food", where each letter indicates the lateral to medial location in the cerebellar white matter.

fastigial nucleus
globose nucleus
emboliform nucleus
dentate nucleus

Cranial nerves
12 Cranial Nerves
On Occasion Of Parties, The Attractive Faces Are Girl Visitors. Say Hello!

CN I Olfactory nerve
CN II Optic nerve
CN III Oculomotor nerve
CN IV Trochlear nerve (Pathetic nerve)
CN V Trigeminal nerve (Dentist's nerve)
CN VI Abducens nerve
CN VII Facial nerve
CN VIII Vestibulocochlear nerve (Auditory nerve)
CN IX Glossopharyngeal nerve
CN X Vagus nerve
CN XI Accessory nerve (Spinal accessory nerve)
CN XII Hypoglossal nerveOOOh the 2 Traceys Are From Virgina Good cause Virginans Are Hilarious
On, On, On, They Traveled And Found Voldemort Guarding Very Ancient Horcruxes

There are many mnemonics for the names of the cranial nerves, e.g.

"OOOTTAFAGVSH" is "OLd OPen OCeans TROuble TRIbesmen ABout Fish VEnom Giving VArious ACute/SPlitting Headaches" (a mnemonic that gives enough letters to distinguish between nerves that start with the same letter), or "On old Olympus's towering tops, a Finn and German viewed some hops," and for the initial letters "OOOTTAFVGVAH" is "Oh, oh, oh, to touch and feel very good velvet ... ah, heaven."  The differences between these depend on "vestibulocochlear nerve" versus "acoustic nerve" and "accessory nerve" versus "spinal accessory nerve".Old Ollie Oson Teaches Teenagers About Fashion Very Gladly Very Adequately Hilarious

Only Our Old Trusty Vodka And Friends Validate Great Victories, So Harmonious.
One Orange Orangutan Tries To Avoid Fragile Vines & Gracefully Vacates All Hazards
Ongoing Optimism Only Teaches True Amazing Fundamentals Varying Globally Versatile And Honesty
Only Old Otters Take Time And Find Very Good Values At Hand
Only One Ounce To Take Another Farmer's Very Great Vest And Hat

Functions of the Cranial Nerves
motor (M), sensory (S), or both (B)

Some Say Marry Money, But My Brother Says Big Business Makes Money.

A common example mnemonic for remembering which nerves are motor (M), sensory (S), or both (B), "Some Say Marry Money But My Brother Says Benevolent Bride Matters More". There are a very large number of additional mnemonics.Summertime Seems More Majestic Because Multiple Bystanders Sing Brilliant Ballads Making Masterpieces
Silly Sally Makes Many Big Muffins But Sally Bakes Big Macarons Moreover
Some  Sundays Make Me Bored, My Brother Stays Busy Building Miniature Models

Some Say Moms Make Boys Magnificent Because She Babies Boys Much More
Sometimes She May Muster Big Motors Because She Believes Both Men Matter
Some Say Marry Money But My Brother Says Big Brains Matter More

Some Say Marry Money, But My Buddy Says Brilliant Brains Make Money

3 branches of the trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Standing room only can be used to remember that:

V1 (ophthalmic nerve) passes through the superior orbital fissure
V2 (maxillary nerve) through the foramen rotundum
V3 (mandibular nerve) through the foramen ovale.

5 branches of the facial nerve (CN VII)
For the five branches of the facial nerve there are: "Two Zebras Bit My Cookie" or "To Zanzibar By MotorCar" or "To Zoo By My Car"

Temporal branch
Zygomatic branch
Buccal branch
Marginal mandibular branch
Cervical branch

Lateral geniculate nucleus (thalamus)
In neuroanatomy, the lateral geniculate nucleus is a structure in the thalamus and a key component of the mammalian visual pathway.

A simple mnemonic for remembering which layers of lateral geniculate body are synapsed with the ganglion cells of the ipsilateral or contralateral optic nerve is "See I? I see, I see," with "see" representing the C in "contralateral," and "I" representing the I in "ipsilateral." (CIICIC)
Another is "Emily and Pete meet eye to eye" as in "M and P meet I to I," or again, "Magno and Parvo meet Ipsi to Ipsi." (MMPPPP)

Another way of remembering which layers of lateral geniculate body are synapsed with the ganglion cells of the ipsilateral or contralateral optic nerve is 2+3=5 (layers II, III and V), which is correct, so it is from the same (ipsilateral) side as the ganglion cells from the side of question, while at the same time 1+4 doesn't equal 6, so the remaining layers (I, IV, and VI) are synapsing with ganglion cells of the other (contralateral) optic nerve.

Coronal section of brain (structures)
"In Extremis, Cannibals Eat People's Globus Pallidi Instead of Their Hearts":
From insula to midline:

Insula
Extream capsule
Claustrum
External capsule
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Internal capsule
Thalamus
Hypothalamus

Anterior Pituitary Hormones
FLAG TOP

FSH
LH
ACTH
GH
TSH
MelanOcyte Stimulating Hormone
Prolactin

Etc.
Bowel components
"Dow Jones Industrial Average Closing Stock Report"From proximal to distal:

Duodenum
Jejunum
Ileum
Appendix
Colon
Sigmoid
Rectum

Duodenum: lengths of parts
"Counting 1 to 4 but staggered":p. 1
1st part: 2 inches
2nd part: 3 inches
3rd part: 4 inches
4th part: 1 inch

Endocrine glands
The major glands of the endocrine system, excluding ovaries and testes: "T-A-P." (T2, A3, P4)

Thymus
Thyroid
Anterior pituitary
Adrenal cortex
Adrenal medulla
Posterior pituitary
Parathyroid gland
Pancreas
Pineal

G.I. tract layers (simplified)
M.S.M.S.

Mucosa
Submucosa
Muscularis propria (or muscularis externa)
Serosa (or adventitia)

Kidney functions
A WET BED

A – maintaining ACID-base balance
W – maintaining WATER balance
E – ELECTROLYTE balance
T – TOXIN removal
B – BLOOD Pressure control
E – making ERYTHROPOIETIN
D – Vitamin D metabolism

Placenta-crossing substances
WANT My Hot Dog
Wastes
Antibodies
Nutrients
Teratogens
Microorganisms
Hormones, HIV
Drugs

Layers of the retina
A mnemonic to remember the layers of the retina:

Sperm: path through male reproductive system
"My boyfriend's name is STEVE":
Seminiferous Tubules
Epididymis
Vas deferens
Ejaculatory duct

Connective Tissue and Fascicles
Every -Endomysium
Person- Perimysium
Eats- Epimysium
Food - Fascia

Intraperitoneal and Retroperitoneal Organs
Retroperitoneal organs in abdominal cavity (secondarily retroperitoneal organs are starred)SAD PUCKER (includes esophagus, excludes inferior vena cava):
Suprarenal (adrenal) glands
Aorta
Duodenum (distal 1st part - 4th part)*
Pancreas*
Ureter
Colon (ascending and descending)*
Kidney
Esophagus
Rectum
KID CARPUS (includes inferior vena cava, excludes esophagus)
Kidney
Inferior vena cava
Duodenum (distal 1st part - 4th part)*
Colon (ascending and descending)*
Aorta
Rectum
Pancreas (head and body)*
Ureter
Suprarenal (adrenal) glands
Intraperitoneal OrgansDJ CLASS PIG
Duodenum (proximal 1st part)
Jejunum
Colon (cecum, transverse, sigmoid)
Liver
Appendix
Stomach
Spleen
Pancreas (tail)
Ileum
Gallbladder

See also
Brachial plexus
Cranial nerve
List of medical mnemonics

References

19. ScienceMnemonic - An Easy Way To Memorize Your Science Knowledge Using Mnemonics, Pictures, Visuals, Acronyms, Usage, Examples, Or Word Games.