The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to politics and political science:

Politics – the exercise of power; process by which groups of people make collective decisions. Politics is the art or science of running governmental or state affairs (including behavior within civil governments), institutions, fields, and special interest groups such as the corporate, academic, and religious segments of society.
Political science – the field concerning the theory and practice of politics and the description and analysis of political systems and political behavior.

Fields of study of political science
Related disciplines
Political theory
Decision-making
Election
Order of succession
Primogeniture

Sortition
Citizens' assembly

Political institutions
Branches of government
The separation of powers is typically set in the constitution or basic law in order to achieve checks and balances within government. The typical model has three branches, and is referred to as the trias politica.

Legislature, deliberates and passes laws.
Unicameralism
Bicameralism
Upper house
Lower house
Tricameralism
Tetracameralism
Multicameralism
Executive, executes laws.
Head of state, formal, often symbolic, leader of state. Sometimes has veto power over proposed legislation.
Monarch
Supreme leader
President
Head of government, the person(s) in charge of day-to-day affairs of the state. Usually heads a cabinet, a Council of Ministers or a Council of State.
Chancellor
Chief executive
Chief minister
First minister
Premier
Prime minister
Judiciary, often involved in politics through judicial review.
Supreme court
Constitutional court

Political parties
Party systems
Nonpartisan democracy
One-party state
Dominant-party system
Two-party system
Multi-party system
Effective number of parties
Party discipline
Political factions
Party coalition governments
Hung parliament
Confidence and supply
Minority government
Rainbow coalition
Grand coalition
National unity government
Majority government

Political behavior
Theories of political behaviour
Political strategy
Voting behavior
Political dysfunction
Types of polities and forms of government
By level of social organisation
By formal power structure
By source of power
Political ideologies and philosophies
Governments of the world
Political issues and policies
Rights
Economic policy
Foreign and security policy
Social policy
Politics by continent
Foreign relations by continents
Political parties by continent
History of politics
History of political science
History of political thinking
Political history
List of years in politics

Political scholars
List of political scientists
List of political philosophers
List of social and political philosophers
List of political theorists

Influential literature
The Art of War – by Sun Tsu (c. 544–496 BC)
History of the Peloponnesian War by Thucydides  (c. 460 – c. 400 BC)
The Republic and Laws – by Plato (427–347 BC)
The Politics and  Nicomachean Ethics – Aristotle (384–322 BC)
Arthashastra – Chāṇakya (c. 350–283 BC)
Meditations – Marcus Aurelius, Roman Emperor 161–180 CE
The Prince – by Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527)
The Book of Five Rings – Miyamoto Musashi (c. 1584––1645)
Leviathan – Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679)
The Wealth of Nations – by Adam Smith (1723–1790)
On War – by Carl von Clausewitz (1780–1831)
The Communist Manifesto – by Karl Marx (1818-1883)

See also
Further reading
Roskin, M.; Cord, R. L.; Medeiros, J. A.; Jones, W. S. (2007). Political Science: An Introduction. 10th ed. New York: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-242575-9 (10). ISBN 978-0-13-242575-9 (13).
Tausch, A.; Prager, F. (1993). Towards a Socio-Liberal Theory of World Development. Basingstoke: Macmillan; New York: St. Martin's Press.
Oxford Handbooks of Political Science – ten-volume set covering the political science topics political methodology, public policy, political theory, political economy, comparative politics, contextual political analysis, international relations, Law and Politics, political behavior, and political institutions. The general editor of the series is Robert E. Goodin.

References
External links

American Political Science Association
European Consortium for Political Research
International Political Science Association
Political Studies Association of the UK
PROL: Political Science Research Online (prepublished research)
Truman State University Political Science Research Design Handbook
A New Nation Votes: American Elections Returns 1787-1825
Political links resource